# Machine Learning and Coffee: A Smart Way to Get to Know your Morning Brew

For centuaries, coffee production has been a rudementary task involving a huge consumption of energy along with a significant enviromental impact. For instance, after selecting and milling, green coffee beans are then heated up in a gas-fired roaster for a given time, resulting in different flavors and characteristics for the consumer. However, such roasting emissions are known to be a big issue for the environment, where toxins in the smoke such as allergens, volatile organic compounds and greenhouse gases are released into the atmosphere. Since coffee consumption per day is quite significant - according to a study by the International  Coffee Organization, just in the United States there are consumed 400 millions cups of coffee per day - it has become rather important to develope new technologies to improve efficiency and sustainability in the large production chain of making a cup of coffee.

In 2013, [The Roastaire](https://www.freshcup.ca/roastaire), an innovation in roasting technology, has made a stand on decreasing levels of carbon footprints related to the number one morning brew, _coffee_. According to this patented, _The Roastaire_ is 20 times more energy efficient as well as 85 per cent emission free than a traditional roaster, without losing quality nor flavor of coffee. This oustanding invention is a clear example of improving the coffee production chain by means of innovation and technology. However, one might wonder if technology could also allows us to predict the quality of artisan coffee and, if so, how it would be of help to  improve such quality and, thus,  to ensure a five-star cup of coffee. By collecting large amounts of data associated with quality factors such as altitude, processing method, roasting profile and so on, data scientists and researchers are applying Machine Learning (ML) techniques to answer such questions.

In plain english, ML is a way to learn from data, in order to spot any pattern that allow to predict better outcomes. More specifically,  ML is an application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that applies a variety of algorithms to a given database, in order to iteratively describe, improve and spot patterns by means of statistical techniques. Bearing that in mind, from previous experiences with different type of coffees beans, roasting methods and many other features, ML techniques could extract for us how good it will taste our hot brew. 

Rooting for answers, two colombian researchers performed a recent study for coffee quality prediction from green and roasted coffee beans features, by applying different ML algorithms. The collection of data used for the study was obtained with the support of _Almacafé_, which is part of the National Federation of Coffee Growers of Colombia (FNC) and it was found that using the ML algorithm called _Neural Network_ (NN), the quality of a cup of coffee can be predicted with an accuracy of 81 per cent as being of high or low quality from the green beans features. 

Additionally, not merely ML can given us a hand with the quality prediction but also with the prediction of coffee grading and disease identification as a new research by PhD. Serawork Wallelign has shown. Thus, ML is helping us to improve our daily experience with coffee and it could provide an useful tool for enhancing the production chain.

